JIRA is a popular project management and a software testing tool used by several testing, development, and technical support teams to complete a great deal of work quicker. Atlassian Inc., an Australian company, developed JIRA.

JIRA is a commercial, multilingual and a platform-independent tool.

It supports Oracle, SQL, MySQL and PostgreSQL servers in the backend.

It is integrated with Hipchat, Bitbucket, Bamboo, Zephyr and other developing and testing tools.

JIRA is used in

Tracking issues, bugs, and change requests.

Support, help desk, and customer services for creating tickets, tracking the resolution and status of the tickets.

Task tracking, project management, and requirement management.

Workflow and process management.

Who Uses JIRA in a Project?
JIRA is used by many. Following are the professionals who use JIRA.

Scrum Masters manage their projects and understand their team capacity.
Developers log issues, resolve issues and create stories.
Testers log issues and verify the issue resolutions.
Program managers understand how effectively the issues are resolving by looking at the reports.
Product users log bugs and feature requests.

The core features of JIRA are mentioned below.

Boards

Boards provide an immediate snapshot of the project to the team. JIRA provides Scrum and Kanban boards.
Power Search

JIRA provides a powerful search functionality with basic quick and advanced features.
JIRA supports the filter (saved search) options using JQL.
Reports

JIRA supports many reports to track progress specific timeframe, deadlines, individual’s contribution, etc.

Features of JIRA
Add-Ins

More than 100 add-ins are supported in JIRA to connect with different software to make work easy.
REST API

Interact with the JIRA Server applications remotely.
Workflow Customization

Provides an option to modify the workflow according to the project requirement.
Roadmap Planning

Enables the team to set a vision for the product and deliver it on time to the customer.

Advantages of JIRA
Better visibility
Better prioritization
Increased productivity
Stay connected on the go
Extensible
Usability

Tool Integrations

Integrating JIRA with compatible tools helps your team with a wide range of information and functionality related to your work.

Following are some of the tools integrated with JIRA.

Hipchat

It is a chatting platform that allows you to discuss the project instantly, be notified of issue updates and can monitor from anywhere.
Bamboo

It seamlessly views and monitors the status of bamboo builds and deployment without leaving JIRA application projects.
Bitbucket

It is a version control repository hosting service that is web-based and used for code review. Bitbucket provides an unlimited number of private repositories.